---
layout:     post
title:      Time to Pay Your Technical Debt
subtitle:   An inevitable part of everyday life
date:       2019-04-26
author:     madranger
header-img: img/pm/tech_debt.png
catalog: true
tags:
    - Agile
    - Project Management
---



# Start from GOT

**Game of Thrones** already returned in this April. The epic fantasy series is not a TV show anymore, but more or less an exciting shot in the arm during every weekend. :smile_cat: Before I started the first episode of season 8, I recap short review videos of the previous seasons in [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WE19Y2FhAAo). It took me **3.5 hours** to refresh my mind of what happened since 2009! No wander this is the `debt` I have to pay as I'm a die-hard fan... LOL ​

> **A Lannister Always Pays His Debts**
>
> ​									          -- Little Imp

This is the one of best-known catchphrases and it seems that a Lannister does always truly pay his debts after all. Jaime pays the Bolton men the money he promised them for returning to Harrenhal to fetch Brienne. And Tyrion pays Mord the gaoler at the Eyrie all the gold he carried with him. Even Cersei pays Euron a wonderful night after she got the \`control\` of the Golden Company. _(though more GOT fans are convinced the Golden Company will betray her sooner or later)_

Hmmm... Indeed, it's also a part of their nature that while they may promise something, that doesn't mean you will get it but possibly deadly revenge.

The earlier you get your desired honey when you don't have ability to own it by yourself, the more debt you have to clear afterward. It is only natural that debts should be paid.



# Triple Constraints

It happens in the similar way in a project that you have to fight with `Cost`, `Schedule`  and `Scope` all the way to the end. Traditional project management is built upon the basis of these triple constraints. Adjusting any of them pushes you to take care of the other one or to factors. As always your ultimate goal is steering them on the right track with no doubt. `Scope` is viewed as being fixed one at the beginning, and defined through comprehensive analysis, discussion and negotiation. Lots of projects fail on it because the scope of the project is either not fully explored or significantly understood and changed during the project. Therefore, more money and time need to be spent.

In Agile, it comes to a different approach by inverting this triangle down to the bottom. At the beginning of the project, the goal is roughly understood from a high-level view. Then iterations are defined and jobs are started straightforward with uncertainties. Agile is more change-tolerant than waterfall. But your Agile project might be killed if you don't keep an eye on the technical debt derived from `Change`. Someone told me a joke that the `Itchy Hand` may collapse your domino tower. _(As a developer with 9 years' coding experience, I have to admit this is true. But with Agile thoughts, I wouldn't blame that itchy hand only.)_ :smile:



# Technical Debt

**Tech debt** is a concept in software development as known as **_design debt_** or **_code debt_**.  Underneath, it's the cost of rework caused by [choosing an easy solution now instead of using a better approach that would take longer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technical_debt). I can be compared to monetary debt. If tech debt is not recognized and paid earlier, it will become more difficult and costly later on. Imagine how is the feeling that you have to redesign a Logger module _(you know the reason)_ for an eCommerce website which you already started working on it for 3 iterations.

## Where does it come from?

In an Agile project, we usually want to build and deliver workable deliverable to customer in a shorter time. And solicit feedback from customer to keep moving on. It can be defined as the longer term consequences of poor design decisions. Meanwhile, other coordinated changes need to be make in other parts, such as other module, processes and documentation. We cannot simply say tech debt is a bad thing and caused by bad engineering or bad design. That's why it's not always the mistake of `Itchy Hands`. I'd like to bring below common causes to your attention.

#### Non-Tech Side

- Insufficient definition of Done. You may find a quick and easy way to design something looks like correct.
- Business & Time pressure. You may have to release something earlier before all necessary improvements are applied. Later one, you continue to build another storey upon a deathtrap.
- Team awareness. Make decisions without considering more impactions.
- Lack of collaboration
- Lack of knowledge and skills
- Lack of alignment of standards. Similar to `Delayed Refactoring`
- Last minute changes. No time to look at the whole.

#### Tech Related

- Misunderstanding of tasks due to knowledge or collaboration
- Lack of test
- Lack of or poor software design pattern.
- Complicated source code maintenance requirement. E.g. need to maintain several copies for different environment and later on you have been asked to merge some of them...
- Delayed refactoring
- Working on legacy code

It's important to identify the real technical debt cos it may block your way ahead. Over time, those factors may make your project more expensive to change.

## Who should be responsible for it?

Rule of Thumb -  As an Agile team, the whole team is responsible for the technical debt without finger pointing. 

But we may think about how to improve it from the view of each role in this team.

## How to deal with it?

For many organizations and projects are new to Agile, this is a huge cultural change. Beware of tech debt and put it in your priority list is important as iteration planning and other task you do daily. Don't hesitate to convince others how important the tech debt would impact your life and why we should to pay the debt as soon as possible.

- Be an advocator of Agile mind-set and coach all stakeholders to look at it in the right way. Believe that paying debt will constantly improve the team velocity.
- Educate the product owner and development team on the meaning of tech debt. To ensure the better `Acceptance Criteria` is created. And assist Scrum team to make sure a better `Definition of Done` to meet the expected product quality.
- Take responsibility as a developer. Developer is the role in the first line to maintain and improving the quality of each increment. Focus on technical excellence and best practices start from the beginning of work. Proactively perform necessary tests and escalate any potential issues emerging during the daily work. Keep in mind product backlog is not a garage you can always dump your stuffs inside of it. Make sure visit them periodically to refresh your mind.
- Run automated tests and conduct continuous integration to prevent bugs as many as possible. keep it small and iterative, therefore keep it moving smoothly.
- Use code metrics to track technical debt. Be transparent about tech debt and address underlying problems during review  and retrospective events. And cover it during iteration planning to make sure actions will be taken.
- Establish clear ground rule and guideline to conduct architectural spike. This will be helpful for the team to speed up and keeping tech debt at a manageable level.

Dealing with tech debt in an Agile environment is a team effort and no one can escape. Know it. Define it. Solve it. You will see the positive effects of these continuous practices in your daily job.